---
draft: false
---
Deaths from chronic conditions that are not recognized as heat-related on death certificates can be estimated using statistical models. There are more of these deaths than those from heat stress. They are called “excess deaths” or “heat-exacerbated deaths.” Unlike heat-stress deaths, which can be individually identified and investigated, excess deaths can be estimated only as aggregate counts. However, estimating heat-exacerbated deaths – or “mortality” – better captures the true extent of how many New Yorkers are dying of the heat.

In the previous two annual reports, we estimated heat-exacerbated mortality risk and number of deaths for a 9-year period (e.g., 2011-2019 for the 2022 report) using weather and natural cause death data for May-September in NYC. Starting this year, we report estimated heat-exacerbated deaths for the current and historical data in five-year rolling time windows to characterize trends. The average natural death count per year was about 18,000 for May through September for the most recent 5-year period (2016-2020). We used time-series statistical models to compare deaths on hot days with those on cooler days. We estimated heat-exacerbated deaths using:

* an indicator (yes/no) for extreme heat event days defined by the National Weather Service’s heat advisory threshold for NYC. Based on the NYC Health Department’s previous analysis of heat-exacerbated mortality, heat advisories are for at least 2 consecutive days with 95°F or higher daily maximum heat index (HI) or any day with a maximum HI of 100°F or higher.
* a range of hot daily maximum temperatures that includes both extreme heat event days and other hot days. We estimated heat-exacerbated deaths for days ranging from the median maximum daily temperature of 82°F through the highest temperature during the period.

These models were run in 5-year rolling time windows between 1971 and 2020. We included deaths occurring on the date of exposure to hot weather and over the following 3 days because previous NYC Health Department studies have shown that heat-exacerbated deaths can occur up to 3 days after the initial hot weather \[4\]. Detailed methods used to estimate risks and attributable deaths can be found in the <a target="blank" href="Heat Mortality Methods 2023.pdf">Appendix Methods and Supplemental Data</a>.

To describe the impact of climate change, we examined how the number of hot days during warm months changed over the past five decades (1971-2020) in rolling 5-year time windows. We also computed the average of daily maximum temperature for each month between May and September to examine if changes in temperature varied by month. 

Historically, the estimated impacts of heat, both extreme and non-extreme hot days, declined substantially between 1971 and 2000, plateaued after 2000, and then started increasing in the past decade (see Figure 3).

From 2016 to 2020, the most recent 5-year time window, the estimated annual average of heat-exacerbated deaths from May-September for all hot days was 345 (95% Confidence Interval \[95CI\]: 139, 549). Heat-exacerbated deaths make up approximately 2% of all natural-cause deaths in the warm months in this most recent period. Heat-exacerbated deaths at and above 82°F show an upward trend in the past decade (see Figure 3).

The estimated annual average of heat-exacerbated deaths associated with extreme heat events for 2016-2020 was 115 (95% CI: 50, 177). In contrast to the trend for both extreme and non-extreme hot days, heat-exacerbated deaths due to only extreme heat days are relatively constant over the past decade (see Figure 3).