---
_schema: default
draft: false
---
The Heat Vulnerability Index (HVI) shows differences in community-level heat impacts during and shortly after extreme heat events (5). The HVI combines environmental factors (measures of a neighborhood’s average surface temperature and percentage of green space) with social factors (percentage of homes with air conditioning, residents’ median income, and the percentage of residents who are Black) to develop a relative measure of a neighborhood vulnerability to heat.

Unlike many social vulnerability indices, the HVI is derived from NYC mortality data, which means that neighborhoods with elevated risk identified by the index are those areas with elevated heat-exacerbated deaths during extreme heat events. HVI scores range from 1 (lowest risk) to 5 (highest risk). The relative heat mortality risk of each <a href="https://www1.nyc.gov/site/planning/data-maps/open-data/dwn-nynta.page" target="_blank" rel="noreferrer noopener">Neighborhood Tabulation Area (NTA</a>) can be explored <a href="https://a816-dohbesp.nyc.gov/IndicatorPublic/key-topics/climatehealth/hvi" target="_blank" rel="noreferrer noopener">here</a>.

Including race in the HVI analysis is critical to understanding the impact of heat: structural racism has resulted in neighborhood disinvestment, racist housing policies, fewer job opportunities and lower pay, and limited access to high-quality education and health care, all of which are associated with health risks including those related to heat. Read more about how structural racism affects <a href="https://a816-dohbesp.nyc.gov/IndicatorPublic/data-stories/housing" target="_blank" rel="noreferrer noopener">housing and public health</a> and the <a href="https://a816-dohbesp.nyc.gov/IndicatorPublic/data-stories/redlining/index.html" target="_blank" rel="noreferrer noopener">history of redlining and how it impacts public health in NYC</a>. The odds of dying are higher in census tracts with higher HVI scores, during extreme heat and on non-extreme hot days.

The best indicator of <a href="https://a816-dohbesp.nyc.gov/IndicatorPublic/key-topics/climatehealth/hvi" target="_blank" rel="noreferrer noopener">neighborhood-level heat impacts is the HVI</a> (see map 1), which shows differences in heat-exacerbated mortality risk. The number of heat-stress deaths by NTA (map 2) should be interpreted with caution. The NTAs are small and the number of deaths at this level is also small and unreliable, so it is difficult to tell whether differences between areas are due to random fluctuation or a difference in risk.