---
draft: false
---

The HVI shows differences in community-level heat impacts during and shortly after extreme heat events (5). The HVI combines environmental factors (measures of a neighborhood’s average surface temperature and percentage of green space) with social factors (percentage of homes with air conditioning, residents’ median income, and the percentage of residents who are Black) to develop a relative measure of a neighborhood vulnerability to heat.

Unlike many social vulnerability indices, the HVI is derived from NYC mortality data, which means that neighborhoods with elevated risk identified by the index are those areas with elevated heat-exacerbated deaths during extreme heat events. HVI scores range from 1 (lowest risk) to 5 (highest risk). The relative heat mortality risk of each&nbsp;[Neighborhood Tabulation Area (NTA](https://www1.nyc.gov/site/planning/data-maps/open-data/dwn-nynta.page)) can be explored&nbsp;[here](../hvi).

Including race in the HVI analysis is critical to understanding the impact of heat: structural racism has resulted in neighborhood disinvestment, racist housing policies, fewer job opportunities and lower pay, and limited access to high-quality education and health care, all of which are associated with health risks including those related to heat. Read more about how structural racism affects&nbsp;[housing and public health](../../../data-stories/housing)&nbsp;and the&nbsp;[history of redlining and how it impacts public health in NYC](../../../data-stories/redlining/index.html).

We updated data for three HVI variables for which new data were available — race, income, and surface temperature — and conducted an analysis to re-examine associations between the updated HVI and heat-exacerbated mortality (see&nbsp;<a target="blank" href="Heat Mortality Methods 2023.pdf">Appendix Methods and Supplemental Data</a>&nbsp;for more information).

The updated HVI continues to be associated with heat-exacerbated mortality during extreme heat and on non-extreme hot days. The odds of dying during hot weather was higher in census tracts with higher HVI scores (see Figure 8). Among the HVI components, air conditioning, race, and income had the strongest associations with heat-exacerbated mortality (see <a target="blank" href="Heat Mortality Methods 2023.pdf">Appendix Methods and Supplemental Data</a>) While green space had a weak protective association compared to the other factors in the HVI, it is a critical factor in addressing the [Urban Heat Island](https://www.epa.gov/green-infrastructure/reduce-urban-heat-island-effect) effect by lowering surface and outdoor air temperatures, providing relief from the heat through shade, and supporting a range of public health benefits beyond heat-related mortality.