---
_schema: default
draft: false
hide: true
---
Since it is impossible to sample the air in every location in New York City, we monitor representative sites to determine how pollution levels vary in relation to traffic, buildings, trees and other neighborhood factors. We use NYCCAS monitoring data along with data on land use, traffic, building emissions and other neighborhood factors around the monitors to build a model. This model is used to predict average air pollution levels at locations across the city, including places where no NYCCAS measurements were collected. For more details on emission source data, see [Appendix 1 (PDF)](pdf/Appendix1.pdf). For more details on the analysis methods, see [NYCCAS Scientific Publications](https://www1.nyc.gov/site/doh/data/data-publications/air-quality-nyc-community-air-survey.page#nyccas-pubs).

In the maps below, you can select a pollutant to see how air pollution is distributed throughout the city and how it has changed over time. The city’s air quality has changed significantly since NYCCAS began monitoring, as can be seen in the maps below. The levels of BC, NO<sub>2</sub>, NO, SO<sub>2</sub> and PM<sub>2.5</sub> have been significantly reduced citywide. The areas where we see the highest levels of these pollutants has also shifted.

Over time, there are better data available for us to understand the relationships between land use and pollution, and the air pollution patterns have shifted as the city changes. Although industrial land use has been a primary indicator of BC, NO, NO<sub>2</sub> and PM<sub>2.5</sub> pollution in the past, in the most recent years of data we see evidence that density of warehouses with loading docks better explains the difference in pollution levels between neighborhoods. Areas with a density of warehouses, such as Newtown Creek area in Queens and Brooklyn, near JFK airport, Sunset Park in Brooklyn and Hunts Point in the Bronx, have higher levels of pollution.

There have been too few sites with SO<sub>2</sub> values above the detection limit for us to include data after winter 2017-2018 in these maps and charts. SO<sub>2</sub> levels have gone down dramatically since [Local Law 43 of 2010 prohibited the burning of heavy fuel oil (No. 6) in New York City buildings (PDF)](https://www1.nyc.gov/assets/dep/downloads/pdf/air/local-law-43-biodiesel-fuel-requirement.pdf). Historical maps for SO<sub>2</sub> and other pollutants are available by clicking on the “All years” button below.

Winter and summer average maps for BC, NO<sub>2</sub>, NO and PM<sub>2.5</sub> are available in [Appendix 2 (PDF)](pdf/Appendix2.pdf).